---
title: "The Rise and Fall of the Note: Changing Paper Lengths in ACM CSCW, 2000-2018"
category: articles
permalink: /articles/2019-09-09-cscw-note/ 
excerpt: "A short paper (or note) quantitatively examining changing paper lengths in the Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, focusing on the rise and fall of the 4-page note format."
venue: "Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction (PACMHCI, CSCW 2019)"
date: 2019-09-09
---

<a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.10808.pdf">Download PDF here</a> and <a href="https://github.com/staeiou/cscw19-paper-lengths">see data and code repository here</a>.

Abstract: In this note, I quantitatively examine various trends in the lengths of published papers in ACM CSCW from 2000-2018, focusing on several major transitions in editorial and reviewing policy. The focus is on the rise and fall of the 4-page note, which was introduced in 2004 as a separate submission type to the 10-page double-column "full paper" format. From 2004-2012, 4-page notes of 2,500 to 4,500 words consistently represented about 20-35% of all publications. In 2013, minimum and maximum page lengths were officially removed, with no formal distinction made between full papers and notes. The note soon completely disappeared as a distinct genre, which co-occurred with a trend in steadily rising paper lengths. I discuss such findings both as they directly relate to local concerns in CSCW and in the context of longstanding theoretical discussions around genre theory and how socio-technical structures and affordances impact participation in distributed, computer-mediated organizations and user-generated content platforms. There are many possible explanations for the decline of the note and the emergence of longer and longer papers, which I identify for future work. I conclude by addressing the implications of such findings for the CSCW community, particularly given how genre norms impact what kinds of scholarship and scholars thrive in CSCW, as well as whether new top-down rules or bottom-up guidelines ought to be developed around paper lengths and different kinds of contributions.

Recommended citation: R. Stuart Geiger. 2019. "The Rise and Fall of the Note: Changing Paper Lengths in ACM CSCW, 2000-2018." Proceedings of the ACM Human Computer Interaction (PACMHCI) 3, CSCW, Article 222 (November 2019), 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359324 https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.10808.pdf
